Governance changes: clearer timelines and conditions for decision making (#1110)
alan-turing-institute/sktime: GOVERNANCE.rst

   * - Code changes and major documentation changes
     - Lazy consensus
   * - Changes to the API design, hard dependencies, or supported versions
     - Lazy consensus based on an :ref:`steps`
     - Lazy consensus, requires a :ref:`steps`
   * - Changes to sktime's governance (this document and the CoC)
     - Lazy consensus based on an :ref:`steps`
     - Lazy consensus, requires a :ref:`steps`
   * - Appointment
     - Voting
     - Directly starts with voting (stage 2)

.. _stage-1:

> Stage 1: lazy consensus with veto right

Reviewer: I prefer the previous header since that's what it is

Author: ok

community tries to find a resolution that has no open objections among
core developers.

-  Proposed changes should be in the form of GitHub pull requests (PR).

>    Some changes also require a worked out :ref:`steps`, this depends on the type of change, see

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Some changes also require a worked out :ref:`steps`. This depends on the type of change, see
```

   `decision making process <#Decision-making>`__ above.
-  For a proposed change to be approved via lazy consensus, it needs to

>    approval by at least one core developer and no rejection by a core developer (veto right).

Reviewer: to explain the header 
```suggestion
   approval by at least one core developer (lazy consensus) and no rejection by a core developer (veto right).
```

>    The approval required for this condition must be by a core developer different from a proposer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Core developer cannot approve their proposed PRs. 
```

Author: this suggestion would not be clear in a case where multiple people work on a PR?

Reviewer: if multiple core devs work on a PR and review each other code, that's fine no? of course it's even better if other core devs review too, especially if it's bigger API changes etc

Author: no, it's *not* fine in my opinion. You can't review your own stuff, it's not a review.

Author: let's discuss separately whether we allow PR authors to review their own PR, we can discuss at the next CC meeting. Until then, let's keep the status quo here.

-  For a proposed change to be rejected via lazy consensus, it needs to receive a
   rejection by at least one core developer, and no acceptance by a core developer.

> -  Approvals must be in the form of a GitHub PR approval. of the PR in question.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-  Approvals must be in the form of a GitHub PR approval of the PR in question.
```

>    Rejections can be expressed as -1 comments, or any written comments
>    containing "I formally reject" in the PR, in reference to it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Rejections must be in the form of a GitHub PR rejection on the PR in question.
```

Author: there is no such thing as a GitHub PR rejection?

-  Proposers are expected to give reasonable time for consideration, that is,
   time and opportunity for core developers to review and
   give their opinion on the PR.
   Ten working days excluding week-ends constitute "reasonable time" in the above sense.
   The period resets at every new change made to the PR.
   It starts only when all GitHub checks pass.

> -  During this period, the PR can be merged if it has an approval and no rejection, but must be
>    reverted if it receives a rejection in addition.

Reviewer: I think this isn't practical and will introduce more confusion. 
```suggestion
-  During this period, the PR can be merged if it has an approval and no rejection, but must be
   reverted if it receives a rejection in addition.
```

Author: well, what's your alternative process? We must always wait for the period to elapse to merge? I don't think we have done this for a single PR.

The other alternative would leave a loophole where proposer and reviewer collude, the reviewer merging a few seconds after a PR appears; or, the less extreme but still problematic version of this where some core devs do not have enough time to review, e.g., since the PR happens on a weekend.

Author: The suggested change does not change anything, so I assume you are fine with the content.

-  If the "reasonable time" period elapses and no approval or rejection has been expressed on a PR,

>    the PR is scheduled at the top of the next regular (bi-monthly) core developer meeting's agenda.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   the PR is scheduled at the top of agenda for the next developer meetup.
```
We should add a link to the meet up page on the new website here

>    In that meeting, a core developer is assigned to review, and approve or reject within
>    5 days of the meeting, excluding week-ends.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   In that meeting, a core developer is assigned to review the PR and either approve or reject within five days of the meeting excluding weekends.
```

> Failure of lazy consensus, in the above sense, can arise only under the following condition:
> at least one approval and at least one rejection in the PR.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Failure of lazy consensus, in the above sense, can arise if a PR has received at least one approval and at least one rejection.
```

Author: it's not an "if" (sufficiency) but an "only if" (necessity), see here for terminology:
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Necessary_and_sufficient_conditions#Definitions

(also, the "can" would be wrong in case you mean sufficiency)

community tries to find a resolution that has no open objections among
core developers.

-  For a proposed changes to be approved via lazy consensus, one of the following
   two conditions must be satisfied:
    - approval by at least one core developer and no rejection by a core developer (veto right).
      The approval required for this condition must be by a core developer different from a proposer.

>     - approval in the regular core developer meeting as part of the agenda.
>       This can happen only if no approvals or rejections are expresesd on a PR, see below.

Reviewer: Let's rely on explicit approvals on GitHub
```suggestion
```
Also makes it easier: you need one approval (lazy consensus) and no rejection (veto right)

Author: but that's still an option! I'm just spelling out the approval conditions. Either what you say (approval, no veto), or approval in the core dev meeting if neither approval nor veto appears on the PR.

-  For a proposed change to be rejected via lazy consensus, one of the following two conditions
   must be satisfied:
    - rejection by at least one core developer, and no acceptance by a core developer.

>     - rejection in the regular core developer meeting as part of the agenda.
>       This can happen only if no approvals or rejections are expresesd on a PR, see below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Author: no? I thought we agreed that if no approvals/rejections appear, it is tabled at the top of agenda at the core dev meeting.

Author: simplified

-  Formal statements on proposed changes must be located with the proposal on GitHub,
   usually in the same pull request that contains the proposal, or the related issue.
   Formal statements in this sense are approvals/rejections, and statements
   about whether the proposal should be considered a "major change", as below.
-  Approvals and rejections can be expressed as +1 and -1 comments,
   respectively, or any written comments
   containing "I formally approve/reject" in reference to the proposal.
   If the proposed change has the form of a PR, approval must be in the form of a GitHub PR approval.
-  Major changes to the project require a more
   detailed analysis and a consensus that is both explicit and informed.
   A major change always require a worked out :ref:`steps`.

>    A change is major in the above sense
>    if at least three core developers explicitly state that the proposal is a major change
>    and requires especial consideration, in the location.

Reviewer: I think some changes are major changes even if less than three core devs explicitly state that on the PR/issue. I'd say we leave out the definition of what counts as "major" here and resolve that through discussion if unclear. 
```suggestion
```

Author: well, but if we don't define what is "major", we cannot make "major" a condition in the rules, since it is undefined and arbitrary otherwise. It appears as a condition for PR that require a STEP.

So either we remove both the requirement of STEPS too, or we leave both things in.

Author: deferred to the table

-  Proposers are expected to give reasonable time for consideration, that is,
   time and opportunity for core developers to review and

>    give their opinion on the contribution.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   give their opinion on the pull request.
```

Author: not all contributions are pull requests - or do we assume they are and must be?

Author: changed all contribs to PR

   Ten working days excluding week-ends constitute "reasonable time" in the above sense.
   For pull requests, the period resets at every new change made to the PR.
   It starts only when all GitHub checks pass.

> -  If the "reasonable time" period elapses and no approval or rejection has been expressed on a PR,
>    the PR is scheduled for decision, at the top of the next regular core developer meeting's agenda
>    in which less than seven PR are already on the agenda. If no regular core developer meeting
>    is scheduled within the two calendar weeks after the period elapses,
>    the core developers must schedule one within those two weeks.

Reviewer: I'd rephrase this as in my comment, since this only applies to PRs by core devs 
```suggestion
-  If a PR by a core developer has not received any approvals or rejections within ten working days excluding weekends, the core developer who opened the PR has the right to put the PR up for discussion at the top agenda in the next regular core developer meeting and receive a review from at least one of the other core developers. 
```

Author: this would make the process less clear:

* how do we prevent too long core dev meetings since there are so many PR?
* how do we prevent that no core dev meeting is planned, is it then indefinitely stalled?
* what does "review" mean? If it is a GitHub review, why is a core dev meeting needed? As opposed to a reviewer being appointed with the duty to review?

Author: clarified that the dev meeting appoints a reviewer.

> -  Decision, in the core developer meeting, is by 2/3 majority of core developers in the meeting,
>    possibly including the proposer.
>    Decision is between approval or rejection. Approval can be subjected to minor corrections, which
>    requires an additional, simple majority consensus decision of core developers in the meeting.
> 
> Approval or rejection as above count as "consensus".
> Lack of such consensus can arise under two conditions:
> - at least one approval and at least one rejection on GitHub
> - no 2/3 majority for either approval or rejection in the core developer meeting

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Reviewer: For me, the main purpose of adding it to the agenda is for the PR to receive at least some feedback, at this stage we don't have to vote yet, voting is also already handled in stage 2, so I'd remove these changes here.

Author: Not against this, but please note that by simply removing this, the process is incomplete. How does it reach stage 2 in your preferred process? There is no link between moving it to the core dev meeting and stage 2.

Author: simplified

Stage 2: voting
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Voting takes place:

> * when no lazy consensus can be found in stage 1 decision making

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* when no lazy consensus can be found in stage 1 above
```

at any point during the discussion.

-  The vote will conclude 5 days excluding weekends from the call for the vote.
-  Votes are voluntary. Abstentions are allowed. Core developers can
   abstain by simply not casting a vote.
-  All votes are a binary vote: for or against accepting the proposed
   changes.
-  Votes are casts as comments: +1 (approval) or -1 (rejection).

> -  Votes are cast publicly, in the location of the proposed change.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-  Votes are cast publicly, on the pull request.
```

Author: are all proposals pull requests? See above.

the CC tries to resolve the deadlock.

-  The CC will use consensus seeking.

> -  If no consensus can be found within twenty working days excluding weekends
>    since the beginning of the stage-1 "reasonable time for consideration" period,
>    the decision is made through a simple majority vote (with tie breaking) among the CC

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-  If no consensus can be found, the decision is made through a simple majority vote (with tie breaking) among the CC
```

Reviewer: there may not always be a CC meeting within that period, the role of the CC meeting in that case would also be to try again to find a consensus, by perhaps taking parts of the PR and rejecting other, etc

Author: this would muddy the definition of what it means "no consensus can be found". When do we pass to the CC?

I really don't like that your suggested changes are reducing accountability and guarantee of speedy process. Whether you intend it or not, removal of clear condtions and clear decision making points is directly hampering effective governance.

   members.

> -  If this vote is needed, the vote should take place within twenty-five working days after the beginning
>    of the stage-1 "reasonable time for consideration" period, during a regular, minuted CC meeting.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Author: why would you want to remove this very generous time limit? It would introduce a problematic loophole where decision making can stall simply since the cc never votes on the PR.

We want to avoid dynamics where indefinite stalling of a decision is a viable option.

Reviewer: I know, but it just adds to many conditions/rules/timescales which are hard to keep track of, the CC will be working to resolve conflicts, don't think we need to impose more time limits here

Author: ok, fine. Let's discuss this addition separately then, I still think giving timelines is important.

-  Any proposal reaching stage 3 must be supported by an :ref:`steps`,

>    which has been made public at least 5 days, excluding week-ends, before the vote.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   which has been made public at least 5 days, excluding weekends, before the vote.
```

.. _steps:

sktime enhancement proposal
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> sktime enhancmenet proposals (STEPs) are required for:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
sktime enhancement proposals (STEPs) are required for:
```

* certain types of proposed changes, by default, see `decision making process <#Decision-making>`__
* for all stage 3 decisions

If a STEP is required by a vote, it must have been made public at least 5 working days (excluding week-ends) before that vote.

A STEP is a consolidated document, with a concise
problem statement, a clear description of the proposed solution and a
comparison with alternative solutions, as outlined in our
`template <https://github.com/sktime/enhancement-proposals/blob/master/TEMPLATE.md>`__.

> A complete STEP must always include at least a high-level design for the proposed change,

Reviewer: As before, let's define STEPs in a single place in the README in the STEPS repo, so a link should do here.

Author: that would make that readme a formal document and an appendix to this one, are you sure?

Reviewer: As said before, I don't see this as a legal document and I don't think it should be, so not really sure what "formal document" or "appendix" means, having a link should do the job

Reviewer: I suggest we have the STEP guidelines on the website at: https://www.sktime.org/en/latest/enhancement_proposals.html

Reviewer: So we can easily link it there

Author: yes, this is already linked, so I assume this is resolved.

not just a wishlist of features.

Usually, we collect and discuss proposals in sktime’s `repository for
enhancement-proposals <https://github.com/sktime/enhancement-proposals>`__.

> For smaller changes, such as punctual changes to the API or governance documents,
> the STEP can also be be part of an issue or pull request.

Reviewer: for smaller changes we don't need a STEP I think, every PR should have some description of what's going on, but that's not what we consider a STEP I'd say 
```suggestion
For smaller changes, such as punctual changes to the API or governance documents,
the STEP can also be be part of an issue or pull request.
```

Author: then this would be in contradiction with the pre-existing requirements for decision making, which require a STEP for every change to the API or the governance document.

Reviewer: Yes every "bigger" change

Author: it doesn't say that in the table (section decision making)

Reviewer: Sure, but I wouldn't call PR descriptions STEPS, so I'd say for smaller changes no STEP is needed

Author: ok - suggestion is identical to the original, so I assume this is resolved.

the CC tries to resolve the deadlock.

-  The CC will use consensus seeking.

> -  If no consensus can be found within twenty working days excluding week-ends

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-  If no consensus can be found within twenty working days excluding weekends
```

Author: appears I'm "old-fashioned", might have been reading too many old books.

A poster puts it nicely [here on quora](https://www.quora.com/Which-is-correct-weekend-or-week-end)

"
Weekend is in 2021 (and has been for many decades) the dominant form.

If you were to use week-end in writing, you would probably be labeled as old-fashioned or as fond of outdated language.

Still, there was a time when weekend was inconceivable, a time when it would have been almost obscene.

To write, around the 1940s:

Where have you been for the weekend?

Would've been just like saying, in 2021:

Who will be the garbage taker outer today?

(Which, by the way, you can translate into English by saying: Who will take out the garbage today?)

Probably one day such an expression will become standard English too.

Back to your question, the turning point was somewhere in the fifties, when weekend was introduced and gradually gained popularity over week-end.

Again, before this time week-end was the only form.
"

   since the beginning of the stage-1 "reasonable time for consideration" period,
   the decision is made through a simple majority vote (with tie breaking) among the CC
   members.
-  If this vote is needed, the vote should take place within twenty-five working days after the beginning
   of the stage-1 "reasonable time for consideration" period, during a regular, minuted CC meeting.
-  CC decisions on major changes must be supported by an :ref:`steps`,
   which has been made public and discussed before the vote.

.. _steps:

sktime enhancement proposal
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

For all stage 3 decisions of the CC on major changes,
an sktime enhancement proposal (STEP) must have been made
public and discussed before the vote.

An sktime enhancement proposal is a consolidated document, with a concise
problem statement, a clear description of the proposed solution and a
comparison with alternative solutions, as outlined in our
`template <https://github.com/sktime/enhancement-proposals/blob/master/TEMPLATE.md>`__.

> A complete STEP must always include at least a high-level design for the proposed change,

Reviewer: I think more info on what consistute a (good) STEP should go into the README of the enhancement-proposal repo.

Author: yes, but that's additional work, right? Should we open an issue?
